Historically, in vitro susceptibility testing was routinely performed by disk diffusion (Kirby-Bauer) method. The size of the growth-
free zone determined whether the bacterium was considered to be susceptible, resistant, or intermediate to a particular antibiotic.
Although a useful guide for selecting an effective antibiotic, Kirby-Bauer testing could not tell the clinician the exact concentration 
of antibiotic needed to achieve a therapeutic result. The alternative automated quantitative method of susceptibility testing 
with the Vitek platform used in our microbiology laboratories supports rapid and accurate quantitative antibiotic susceptibility 
test (AST) reporting, including minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC). The MIC provides the ability to precisely determine the 
concentration of antibiotic required to inhibit growth of a pathogen.
Your IDEXX microbiology results will show the identity of the organism and the appropriate antibiotic sensitivity pattern against 
each organism. Most antibiograms will include MICs in order to determine the most effective antibiotic that will result in 
effective treatment.
What is an MIC?
The MIC, or minimum inhibitory concentration, is the lowest 
concentration (in μg/mL) of an antibiotic that inhibits the growth 
of a given strain of bacteria. This is a strain dependent value 
that will greatly differ between different bacterial species and 
even within one species depending on the individual strain 
isolated in the respective clinical case, even for the same 
antibiotic examined. At IDEXX, a commercial automated 
system is used to determine MICs. A quantitative method of 
susceptibility testing, an MIC helps determine which class of 
antibiotic is most effective. This information can lead to an 
appropriate choice of an antibiotic that will increase chances 
of treatment success and help in the fight to slow antibiotic 
resistance.
The MIC is reported as a numerical value. Values above or 
below the range of measurement are indicated with “<=” (in 
case of below the range, in the susceptible category) or with 
“>=” (in case of above the range, in the resistant category).
How is the MIC reported?
Next to each antibiotic is the susceptibility interpretation: 
S (sensitive), I (intermediate), or R (resistant) are the three 
interpretative categories, listed in the first result column of the 
susceptibility report. The respective category is followed by 
the MIC in μg/mL in the next result column of the susceptibility 
report. “Sensitive” implies that the organism is inhibited by the 
serum concentration of the drug that is achieved using the 
usual dosage; “intermediate” implies that the organisms are 
inhibited only when higher concentrations than with the usually 
recommended dosages are achievable; and “resistant” implies 
that the organisms are resistant to the usually achievable 
serum drug levels. These interpretive standards have been 
established by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute 
(CLSI). The interpretative categories are evaluated according 
to the so-called breakpoints for each antibiotic as listed in the 
current versions of the CLSI documents.
Microbiology guide to interpreting 
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
This guide provides a detailed explanation of the following concepts which are important in 
implementing the MIC:
•  The MIC number is the lowest concentration (in μg/mL) of an antibiotic that inhibits the growth of a given strain of bacteria. 
(See the section “What is an MIC?”)
• An MIC number for one antibiotic CANNOT be compared to the MIC number for another antibiotic. 
(See the “How are MICs used?” section.)
• The choice of antibiotic should not be based on the MIC alone but on several other criteria. 
(See the “antibiotic selection” section).
• The attached tables will aid in MIC interpretation and antibiotic selection.
Example for reporting AST result
Bacteriologic examination, culture aerobic: 
• Staphylococcus intermedius group, moderate count (1) 
• Escherichia coli, high count (2)
 
Antibiogram for strain no. (1) (2) Remark
SIR MIC SIR MIC
Penicillin R >=0.5
Ampicillin R S <=2 Also valid for Amoxicillin
Amoxicillin R S Also valid for Ampicillin
Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid S <=2 S <=2
Cefalexin S S <=4
Cefazolin S
Cefalotin S <=2 I 4
Cefovecin S <=0.5 S <=0,5
Ceftiofur S <=0.5 S <=1
Cefpodoxim S S <=0,25
Cefoperazone S S
Cefquinome S S
Oxacillin S <=0.25 S    
Cloxacillin S
Gentamicin S <=0.5 S <=1
Kanamycin S <=4 Also valid for Neomycin
Erythromycin S 0.5
Tetracycline S <=1 S <=1 Stands for all tetracyclines
Doxycycline S <=0.5 S 1
Enrofloxacin S <=0.5 S 0,5 Stands for all fluorchinolones
Marbofloxacin S <=0.5 S <=0,5
Pradofloxacin S <=0.12 S 0,25
Nitrofurantoin S <=16 S <=16
Clindamycin S 0.25
Lincomycin S
Sulfamethox./Trim. S <=10 S <=20 Also valid for other sulfonamide/trim. combinations
Chloramphenicol S 8 S 8 Stands for all phenicoles (e.g. florfenicol)
Florfenicol S S
Imipenem S S <=0,25 Strictly verify indication
Meropenem S S Strictly verify indication
Amikacin S S <=2 Strictly verify indication
Tobramycin S S Strictly verify indication
Azithromycin S Strictly verify indication
Clarithromycin S Strictly verify indication
Interpretation key for the antibiogram:
S = sensitive; active substance normally effective against microorganisms at recommended dosage. 
I = intermediate; active substance may be effective against microorganism at higher than recommended dose. 
R = resistant; active substance not effective against microorganism either in recommended or higher dosage due to resistance mechanism.
Method: automated resistance determination (MIC), according to guidelines of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI). MIC values (if available) expressed in µg/ml. 
SIR results and / or MIC values are not reported if no CLSI interpretation criteria (so-called breakpoints) are available, the growth conditions of the microorganism do not permit 
measurement with the method used, or determination for the individual isolate was not possible.
The results are partly obtained by derivation according to international guidelines (information available on request from the laboratory). The antibiogram is compiled according to 
the microorganisms. An absent SIR result in the antibiogram generally indicates an unsuitable combination of microorganism and active substance. Please also note the information 
regarding lead substances and cross resistances.
Please observe application restrictions and contraindications! The choice of antibiotic is the responsibility of the attending veterinarian. The test method refers to systemic effective 
levels. Testing locally applicable active substances such as fusidic acid and polymyxin B is not possible.
For more information about the MIC, please visit our website (keyword „MIC“).
When are MICs not performed?
MICs are not performed when:
• The growth requirements of some organisms require the 
sensitivity testing to be performed by another method.
• Interpretive criteria are not available from CLSI.
• Certain antibiotics are not available on our automated 
system.
• The drug is known to be clinically ineffective against the 
organism, regardless of the in vitro results.
• By design the drug is not active against the microorganism, 
e.g. Clindamycin is designed for Gram-positive 
microorganisms only, and therefore not tested against 
Gram-negative microorganisms (e.g. Pseudomonas sp.)
• Due to the antibiotic panel in the automated system 
the antibiotic was not measured, and the result for 
the interpretative category was achieved by deduction 
according to international guidelines.
How are MICs used?
An antibiotic breakpoint is the dilution where bacteria begin to 
show resistance. The breakpoint and range of dilutions differ 
by drug and bacterial species. Tables listing the respective 
breakpoints are subject to constant re-evaluation by CLSI 
according to newest scientific data (pharmacological and 
clinical data). The most current versions are available online 
(see https://clsi.org/).
Comparing MICs of different antibiotics is not based solely 
on the numerical value but on how far the MIC is from the 
breakpoint, the site of the infection, and other considerations, 
such as the age, species, and health of the animal. Possible 
side effects of the drug, frequency, and route of administration 
are also important factors.
For example: A strain of Staphylococcus pseudintermedius 
has an MIC of 0.5 μg/ml for erythromycin and of 0.25 μg/ml for 
pradofloxacin. Looking at the dilutions for erythromycin, at 0.5 
μg/ml, this strain of Staphylococcus pseudintermedius is four 
dilutions away from the breakpoint. For pradofloxacin, the same 
strain of Staphylococcus pseudintermedius at an MIC of 0.25 
μg/ml is three dilutions away from the breakpoint. So, based 
on MICs, this strain of Staphylococcus pseudintermedius 
is more susceptible to erythromycin than pradofloxacin. 
For other factors to take into consideration see section 
“antibiotic selection”.
Quick guide for MIC interpretation
See below a simplified approach to use MIC values:
If the result is: MIC Then the antibiotic is: Further action / remark:
Sensitive <= (any number) effective at the lowest concentration tested should be effective choice
Sensitive (any number) effective, but not at the lowest concentration 
tested
refer to MIC range to determine where in the range the 
strain falls and compare this with other choices
Intermediate (any number)
may be effective in high dosages or if it 
concentrates at the site of infection
refer to reference ranges for achievable antibiotic levels 
in affected tissues
Resistant (any number) will be unlikely to reach effective serum levels choose an antibiotic that tests as sensitive
Resistant >= (any number) unlikely to be effective choose an antibiotic that tests as sensitive
Our consultants are available to help you interpret test 
results.
The introduction of MIC values enables a quantitative result, while 
the qualitative assessment is expressed as Sensitive, Intermediate 
or Resistant. This last classification, into effectiveness classes, is 
of direct clinical relevance to the veterinary practitioner.
The MIC value is primarily a parameter that is required for 
the precise evaluation of the laboratory test. It is required to 
establish the in vitro effectiveness of the antibiotic with respect 
to the isolate. As has already been mentioned in the example 
earlier, the MIC values of different agents for clinical use cannot 
be compared with each other directly. An antibiotic with an MIC 
MIC (µg/ml) 0.12 0.25 0.5 1 2 4
Interpretative 
category
S S I I R R
Breakpoint for R
Pradofloxacin, Staph. pseudintermedius
MIC (µg/ml) 0.25 0.5 1 2 4 8
Interpretative 
category
S S I I I R
Breakpoint for R
Erythromycin, Staph. pseudintermedius
For example: Erythromycin is 4 dilutions away from its 
breakpoint while pradofloxacin is only 3 dilutions away from 
its breakpoint. Therefore, in this case, although the absolute 
MIC value measured for pradofloxacin (0.25 μg/ml) is lower 
than the one measured for erythromycin (0.5 μg/ml), the 
strain is more susceptible to erythromycin.
In vitro efficacy of pradofloxacin and erythromycin for 
a Staphylococcus pseudintermedius strain:
MIC = 0.25 µg/ml 
3 dilutions below breakpoint
MIC = 0.5 µg/ml 
4 dilutions below breakpoint
value of 0.25 μg/ml can prove less effective than one with an 
MIC value of 0.5 μg/ml. This may seem illogical, since in the 
case of the latter agent, double the concentration seems to 
be required to inhibit microbial growth in vitro. However, when 
actually used on the patient, pharmacokinetic and clinical 
parameters also come into play. These factors were taken 
into account in the establishment of the clinical breakpoint by 
the CLSI and lead to the clinical classification of each isolate 
as sensitive, intermediate or resistant to an agent. Thus, an 
isolate may be graded sensitive to an agent at an equal or 
even higher MIC, while the same isolate has to be judged 
resistant to another agent with the same or even a lower MIC. 
This is one more demonstration that the MIC value or its level 
is insufficient on its own to permit any clinical pronouncement 
and, furthermore, has to be assessed individually, depending 
on agent and pathogen. No conclusion regarding the 
necessary therapeutic dose can be drawn directly from the 
MIC value. Only when the pharmacological parameters, such 
as tissue distribution, attainable concentration in the target 
tissue, rate of elimination, toxicity thresholds, etc. are precisely 
known can the MIC value be used for clinical applications. For 
direct clinical use, the therapeutic interpretation (S, I, or R) is 
the basis for successful therapy.
Class-reference antibiotics
Some antibiotics are used to determine the susceptibility of 
other antibiotics in the same class. For example, the presence 
of methicillin-resistant staphylococci (MRS) is tested in the 
laboratory with oxacillin and / or cefoxitin and not methicillin. 
The name MRS is used because of convention over years of 
use in scientific articles and textbooks.
Antimicrobial 
agent
Susceptibility prediction for:
Cephalexin All first-generation cephalosporins, except cefazolin
Clindamycin Lincosamides (lincomycin, pirlimycin) (GP only)
Erythromycin
Azithromycin and clarithromycin (GP only), 
macrolides (14), (in part) tylosin (16), spiramycin
Oxacillin
Methicillin (MRS) and isoxazolylpenicillines 
(cloxa-, dicloxacilline)
Tetracycline Doxycycline, oxytetracycline
Sulfamethoxazol/
trimethoprim
Other potentiated sulfonamides
Ampicillin Aminopenicillines (e.g. amoxicillin); penicillin (GP)
Kanamycin Neomycin, framycetin, paromomycin
Chloramphenicol Phenicoles (florfenicol)
   (GP = Gram-positive microorganisms )
And finally: why is sometimes no susceptibility 
report available at all?
At IDEXX we follow international guidelines set by the Clinical 
Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) combined with our years 
of experience in performing susceptibility testing. As such the 
following is an outline of our antibiotic testing policy:
• Susceptibilities are not performed on normal flora and 
non-pathogenic microorganisms.
• Pathogens with no international interpretative standards 
will be reported with a recommended list of antibiotics 
(if available from scientific sources). Examples include 
Corynebacterium species and Campylobacter species.
• In case susceptibility testing is not possible (e.g. method 
no applicable, general or individual growth failure) a 
recommended list of antibiotics will be reported (if available 
from scientific sources).
• Topical agents will not be tested. There are NO international 
guidelines for laboratory-based susceptibility testing of 
these agents. Any testing of such may lead to serious 
misleading results. Examples include agents included in 
eye and ear preparations.
• We do not test inappropriate organism/antibiotic 
combinations, such as Clindamycin against Gram-
negative organisms or penicillin against E. coli (both 
examples have intrinsic resistance mechanisms against 
these antibiotics).
Customer support services
IDEXX supports your practice with our customer support, 
technical support, and medical consulting services teams, 
including our diagnostic support veterinarians and veterinary 
specialists.
If you have questions, please contact Customer Support at:
 070 700 7033
Antibiotic selection
When selecting an antibiotic, keep in mind that other factors in 
addition to the MIC are important. The location of the infection 
is important because lipid-soluble drugs reach higher levels 
in the tissue than they do in serum. Drugs excreted by the 
kidney reach much higher bladder levels than serum levels. 
Also, some drugs are more effective against Gram-negative 
bacteria than Gram-positive bacteria and vice versa. Species 
considerations are also important because certain antibiotics 
are toxic in some species. 
Therefore, the choice of antibiotic should be based not on the 
MIC alone but on several other criteria. 
Factors for selecting the most appropriate agent include:
• The MIC numerical value
• The antibiotic’s breakpoint (how far the MIC is from the 
breakpoint)
• The site of infection (achievable drug levels at site of 
infection)
• Age of patient, animal species, health of animal (known 
organ disorders, immune status)
• Mode of action (bacteriostatic / bactericide), spectrum 
(broad-spectrum versus narrow-spectrum)
• Pharmacokinetics (volume of distribution, bioavailability, 
route of elimination)
• Restrictions in application (antibiotic guidelines according 
to countries, or restrictions for use in farm animals, 
restrictions for critically important antibiotics)
• Safety / contraindications, possible side effects of the 
drug, toxicity margin
• Ease of use, frequency and route of administration
Consider the appropriate criteria in each clinical case 
when determining the optimum antibiotic.
For the choice of an antibiotic one has also to take into 
consideration that different countries have different antibiotic 
guidelines. Regional recommendations and legal restrictions 
should also be taken into consideration. Antibiotics considered 
critically important should only be used with great care and 
never as first-line drugs.
The information contained herein is intended to provide general guidance only. As with any diagnosis or treatment, you should use 
clinical discretion with each patient based on a complete evaluation of the patient, including history, physical presentation and complete 
laboratory data. With respect to any drug therapy or monitoring program, you should refer to product inserts for a complete description 
of dosages, indications, interactions and cautions.
All ®/TM marks are owned by IDEXX Laboratories, Inc. or its affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. The IDEXX Privacy Policy is 
available at idexx.com. © 2019 IDEXX Laboratories. Inc. All rights reserved · 1906008-0719-NL 
